# 10. Development Process

The CHHS Data Subcommittee requested the convening of the CHHS Data De- Identification Workgroup to develop the DDG.

The DDG Workgroup began with an orientation to the topic of data de-identification and presentations by the DHCS, OSHPD and California Department of Public Health (CDPH) regarding current practices and activities related to data de-identification. The DDG Workgroup used the Public Aggregate Reporting for DHCS Business Reports (PAR-DBR) as a starting point for initial drafts. The PAR-DBR had been developed between April and August, 2014 through a workgroup processes within DHCS with input and presentations from OSHPD, CDPH, and University of California, Los Angeles California Health Interview Survey. The PAR-DBR served as a basis for this document, including the literature review conducted as part of the development of the PAR-DBR.

The development process was designed to include an updated literature review, case examples and broad discussion among CHHS programs. Publishing data publicly is always a balance between the protection of confidentiality and the usability of the data.

The project timeline for the CHHS DDG Workgroup is below:

3/15/15           Planning Meeting Part 1 – Participants included DHCS, CDPH, OSHPD, OHII

3/20/15           Planning Meeting Part 2 – Participants included DHCS, CDPH, OSHPD, OHII

4/7/15             Present Objectives for the project and use the DHCS PAR-DBR as an example

4/23/15           Presentations from OSHPD and CDPH regarding current processes and approach to small cell sizes

5/5/15             Discuss concept of uniqueness as a way to measure risk for re- identification and gather input from Departments/Offices regarding DDG variables and topics

5/27/15           Review initial draft DDG – Focus on new sections of the document 6/8/15             Review initial draft DDG – Focus on Data Assessment for Public

Release Procedure

May &             Meet with each department/office individually June, 2015

\


6/30/15           Review draft DDG version 0.2

July 2015       Departments/offices vet the DDG within their departments/offices 8/21/15           Received input from the CHHS Risk Management Committee 8/6/15                        Review draft DDG version 0.3

9/14/15           Progress update for DDG Workgroup and discussion of additional topics

12/18/15         Presentation from NORC to review their findings of the draft DDG 1/8/16             Receive final recommendations from NORC

Jan. 2016      Provide DDG version 0.4 to DDG Workgroup

2/18/16           Review and discussion of draft DDG version 0.4 with the DDG Workgroup

3/18/16           Provide DDG version 0.5 with outstanding comments from the DDG Workgroup to the Data Subcommittee

4/18/16           Provide revised draft DDG to the Data Subcommittee.

5/24/16           Provide draft DDG version 0.7 from the CHHS Data Subcommittee to the CHHS Advisory Council. The Advisory Council shared the DDG version 0.7 with the other subcommittees and discussed the version

0.7 at the 6/8/16 meeting and the version 0.8 at the 7/6/16 meeting. 7/7/16             Provide draft DDG version 0.10 to the Undersecretary.

9/23/16           DDG approved by CHHS Undersecretary as Version 1.0.

The final document will be incorporated into the Open Data Handbook and made publicly available.
