---
icon: file-chart-pie
---

# 5. Types of Reporting

CalHHS programs develop a wide range of information based on different types of data. This is reflected in the various categories shown on the entry page for the CalHHS Open Data Portal, which include:

* Diseases and Conditions
* Facilities and Services
* Health Care
* Workforce
* Environment
* Demographics
* Resources

Various types of reporting may or may not have a connection to personal characteristics that would create potential risk of identifying individuals.&#x20;

## 5.1 Variables <a href="#toc196116290" id="toc196116290"></a>

The following two lists of variables are important to consider when preparing data for release.

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="1. Personal Characteristics" %}
* Age
* Sex
* Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
* Intersex
* Race
* Ethnicity
* Language Spoken
* Immigration Status
* Location of Residence
* Education Status
* Financial Status
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="2. Event Characteristics" %}
* Number of events
* Location of event
* Time period of event
* Provider of event
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

As stated previously, variables that are personal characteristics may be used to determine a person’s identity or attributes. When these characteristics are used to confirm the identity of an individual in a publicly released dataset, then a disclosure of an individual’s information has occurred. Individual uniqueness in the released data and in the population is a quality that helps distinguish one person from another and is directly related to re-identification of individuals in aggregate data. Disclosure risk is a concern when released data reveal characteristics that are unique in both the released data and in the underlying population. The risk of re-identifying an individual or group of individuals increases when unique or rare characteristics are “highly visible”, or otherwise available without any special or privileged knowledge. Unique or rare personal characteristics (e.g., height above seven feet) or information that isolate individuals to small demographic subgroups (e.g., American Indian Tribal membership) increase the likelihood that someone can correctly attribute information in the released data to an individual or group of individuals.

Variables that are event characteristics are often associated with publicly available information.

Therefore, increased risk occurs when personal characteristics are combined with enough granularity with event characteristics. One could argue that if no more than two personal characteristics are combined with event characteristics then the risk will be low independent of the granularity of the variables. This hypothesis will need to be tested using various population frequencies to quantify the uniqueness of the combination of variables both in the potential data to be released as well as in the underlying population.

## 5.2 Survey Data <a href="#toc196116291" id="toc196116291"></a>

Survey data, often collected for research purposes, are collected differently than administrative data, and these differences should be considered in decisions about security, confidentiality, and data release.

Administrative data sources (non-survey data) such as vital statistics (e.g., births and deaths), health care administrative data (e.g., Medi-Cal utilization; hospital discharges), reportable disease surveillance data (e.g., measles cases) contain data for all persons in the population with the specific characteristic or other data elements of interest. Most of the discussions in this document pertain to these types of data.

On the other hand, surveys (e.g., the California Health Interview Survey) are designed to take a sample of the population and collect data on characteristics of persons in the sample, with the intent of generalizing to gain knowledge suggestive of the whole population.

The sampling methodology developed for any given survey is generally developed to maximize the sample size with the available resources while making the sample as un- biased (representative) as possible. These sampling procedures that are a fundamental part of surveys generally change the key considerations for the protection of security and confidentiality and give an extra layer of masking which can decrease the risk of re-identification. Given the world of artificial intelligence, increased availability of data on social platforms, increased incidences of data hacking, and the passage of new laws on data sharing, there is a much higher risk to re-identify an individual when small numbers are released. Thus, the Publication Scoring Criteria should be used to assess the potential risk and the same Data De-Identification Guidelines should be applied to the survey data.

Also, it is in the context of surveys that issues of statistical reliability often arise—which are distinct from confidentiality issues, but often arise in related discussions. We recommend that the estimates be considered statistically unreliable and suppressed if the denominator is based on fewer than 30 sample cases.

A few national and state surveys have adopted various guidelines to de-identify their survey data and various thresholds for the [reliability of sample sizes](#user-content-fn-1)[^1]. If any state or national survey has not adopted its own guidelines to de-identify data and/or threshold of statistical reliability and if the survey is not included in the Appendix H list, then the above-mentioned CalHHS Data De-Identification Guidelines and threshold of 30 sample cases should be observed by the CalHHS departments.

## 5.3 Budgets and Fiscal Estimates <a href="#toc196116292" id="toc196116292"></a>

Budget reporting may include both actual and projected amounts. Projected amounts, although developed with models that are based on the historical actuals, reflect activities that have not yet occurred and, therefore, do not require an assessment for de-identification. Actual amounts do need to be assessed for de-identification. When the budgets reflect caseloads, but do not include personal characteristics of the individuals in the caseloads or other variables in the scoring criteria, then the budgets are reflecting data in the Providers and Health and Service Utilization Data circles of the Figure 2 Venn Diagram and do not need further assessment.

However, the budget reporting needs to be assessed for de-identification if the data:

* Reflects anything that can be tied back to member counts, or services provided to members
* Includes personal characteristics, such as age, sex, race or ethnicity, or other variables in the scoring criteria.

## 5.4 Facilities, Service Locations and Providers <a href="#toc196116293" id="toc196116293"></a>

Many CalHHS programs oversee, license, accredit or certify various businesses, providers, facilities, and service locations. As such, the programs report on various metrics, including characteristics of the entity and the services provided by the entity.

* Characteristics of the entity are typically public information, such as location, type of service provided, type of license and the license status.
* Services provided by the entity will typically need to be assessed to see if the reporting includes personal characteristics about the individuals receiving the services. Several examples are shown below.

a) Reporting number of cases of mental illness treated by each facility – if the facility is a general acute care facility, then the reporting of the number of cases does not tell you about the individuals receiving the services.

b) Reporting number of cases of mental illness treated by each facility – if the facility is a children’s hospital, then the reporting of the number of cases does tell you about the individuals receiving the services.

c) Reporting number of psychotropic medications prescribed by a general psychiatrist does not tell you about the patients receiving the medications.

d) Reporting number of psychotropic medications prescribed by a general psychiatrist to include the number of medications prescribed by the age group, sex or race/ethnicity of the patients receiving the medications does tell you about the patients receiving the medications.

In (a) and (c) above, assessment for de-identification is not necessary as there are no characteristics about the individuals receiving the services. However, in (b) and (d) above, the inclusion of personal characteristics which may be quasi-identifiers, especially when combined with the geographical information about the provider, does require an assessment for de-identification.

## 5.5 Mandated Reporting <a href="#toc196116294" id="toc196116294"></a>

CalHHS programs are required to provide public reporting based on federal and California statute and regulations, court orders, and stipulated judgments, as well as by various funders. Although reporting may be mandated, unless the law expressly requires reporting of personal characteristics, publicly reported data must still be de-identified to protect against the release of identifying or personal information which may violate federal or state law.&#x20;

## 5.6 Special Scenarios <a href="#toc196116295" id="toc196116295"></a>

### 5.6.1 Data with More Specificity

Specific diagnosis and procedure codes have higher risk of identification because of their unique nature. Thus, these diagnosis and procedure codes should be scored based on “Other Variables” in Section 16.2.14.

Some examples of data with more specificity include:

* [Specific ICD codes for surgical procedures: Bariatric surgery (Z98. 84) \[Examples of specific bariatric procedures: Open Roux-en-Y (0D160ZB), Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y (0DB64Z3), Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy (0DB64Z3), Biliopancreatic Diversion with Duodenal Switch (BPD/DS) (0DB60Z3+0D160ZB+0D194ZB), Adjustable Gastric Lap Band (Z46. 51), Single Anastomosis Duodeno-ileal Bypass with Sleeve Gastrectomy(0D16079)](#user-content-fn-2)[^2]]
* Specific diagnoses: Disability \[Complete Paraplegia G82.21], birth defects \[e.g., Cleft Palate (Q35. 9)], neurological disorders \[e.g., Dyslexia and alexia (R48.0), Cerebral Palsy (G80. 9)], and End stage renal disease (N18.6).
* Specific procedure codes: Transcranial doppler ultrasound (CPT code 93886 or 93971), Sickle cell screening (Z 13.0 or D57. 1).

### 5.6.2 High-Risk Populations which require suppression of counts <11 regardless of score

911 calls and court records are considered public information. Therefore, a large amount of information is publicly available about individuals who interact with emergency services or the justice system, including identifying information such as name, gender, date of birth, age, and, when applicable, the location of where the patient is currently housed or is committed to. Examples of populations that may interact with emergency services or the justice system at a higher rate than other populations include:

* People with substance use disorders (SUD), serious mental illnesses (SMI), psychological or emotional trauma, or developmental disabilities;
* People who are involved in the child welfare system, experiencing housing instability or homelessness, victims of crime and abuse, or justice-involved;
* People without U.S. citizenship.

Therefore, regardless of the underlying population, suppression of counts less than 11 is always required for these populations. Note that most of the demographic variables are assigned risk scores that are consistent with those of Table 2 in Section 16.2. However, the above-mentioned high-risk populations have been exempted from this requirement due to the higher potential visibility of these individuals in public information (e.g., from police reports or news reports) that inherently increases risk of re-identification that is a risk that is not otherwise accounted for with the scoring criteria.

Some examples of the above include:

* SUD: medication assisted treatment services, prescription opioid misuse, other illicit drugs use
* SMI: schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorders, bipolar disorder, unspecified psychosis not due to a substance or known physiological condition, paraphilias, personality disorders, major depressive disorders, delusional disorders, stimulant related disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder
* Claims for emergency transport

Acknowledging the possibility of the use of reproductive health care data for law enforcement purposes, [California law provides additional privacy protections for individuals receiving health care services related to pregnancy termination and for individuals receiving gender-affirming care](#user-content-fn-3)[^3].\[5] Given the recognized risk associated with these services, suppression of counts less than 11 is always required regardless of the underlying population.

Some examples of the above include:

* Reproductive Health: surgical termination of pregnancy, medication/pharmaceutical termination of pregnancy
* Gender-Affirming Care: sex reassignment surgery, hormone replacement therapy

### 5.6.3 Re-Identification Risk with Increased Granularity

Sometimes, we may be asked to provide more granular data. However, [increasing the number of demographic attributes or providing additional variables to achieve this](#user-content-fn-4)[^4] increases the risk that the unique combination of variables can effectively re-identify an individual.

If the expert determines that the provided information could be used, alone or in combination with other available information to identify or re-identify an individual, then the data should not be released. Instead, an alternative method that protects the privacy of individuals should be used to provide the requester with the data they need.

[^1]: Klein RJ, et al. Healthy People 2010 Criteria for Data Suppression. Centers for Disease Prevention and Control, Statistical Notes. [https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statnt/statnt24.pdf](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statnt/statnt24.pdf)

[^2]: Mayo Clinic. Bariatric Surgery: Overview, [https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/bariatric-surgery/about/pac-20394258](https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/bariatric-surgery/about/pac-20394258)



    American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery: Public education committee. Bariatric Surgery Procedures, [https://asmbs.org/patients/bariatric-surgery-procedures](https://asmbs.org/patients/bariatric-surgery-procedures)

    [https://www.cms.gov/medicare/coding-billing/icd-10-codes](https://www.cms.gov/medicare/coding-billing/icd-10-codes)

[^3]: AB 352 (Bauer-Kahan, Chapter 255, Statutes of 2023)

[^4]: Sweeney, “Uniqueness of Simple Demographics in the U.S. Population”, LIDAPWP4. Carnegie Mellon University, Laboratory for International Data Privacy, Pittsburgh, PA, 2000.



    Golle, “Revisiting the Uniqueness of Simple Demographics in the US Population”, Accessed [from stanford.edu](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~pgolle/papers/census.pdf): [https://crypto.stanford.edu/\~pgolle/papers/census.pdf](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~pgolle/papers/census.pdf)



    Rocher, et al. “Estimating the success of re-identifications in incomplete datasets using generative models”, Nat Commun 10, 3069 (2019). [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10933-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10933-3)
