# 7. Approval Process

After completion of the statistical de-identification process, each department will specify the additional review steps necessary for public release. This may vary depending on the purpose of the release and whether or not the department/program is a HIPAA covered entity.

Recognizing that some data analyses may be published as independent tables while other analyses will be part of larger reports, the final review of all data analyses must follow the department or office procedures for document review in addition to review procedures identified for the implementation of the DDG. The expectation is that the review of data for de-identification will fit into other routine review processes. Reviews outside the DDG portion may vary depending on whether data is being released for a PRA request, to the media, to the legislature, by the program as part of routine reporting, or for other reasons.

Departments and offices may consider the following components for reviews related to data that has been de-identified.

* Statistical Review to Assess De-identification (for HIPAA entities this may be an Expert Determination Review)
* Legal Review
* Departmental Release Procedures

### Statistical Review to Assess De-identification (Steps 1, 2, 3 & 4)

The department or office may designate individuals within the department to provide a statistical review of data products before they are released to ensure the data has been de-identified with methods that are consistent with these guidelines.

For HIPAA covered entities, this will be performed by individuals who are considered experts for the purpose of performing expert determinations in compliance with the HIPAA Privacy Rule, and who meet the Rule’s implementation specifications: “A person with appropriate knowledge of and experience with generally accepted statistical and scientific principles and methods for rendering information not individually identifiable” \[45 CFR Section 164.514(b)(1)] This expert determination review, according to the regulation’s requirements, will be performed by:

> (1) A person with appropriate knowledge of and experience with generally accepted statistical and scientific principles and methods for rendering information not individually identifiable:
>
> * (i) Applying such principles and methods, determines that the risk is very small that the       information could be used, alone or in combination with other reasonably available information, by an anticipated recipient to identify an individual who is a subject of the information; and
> * (ii)   Documents the methods and results of the analysis that justify such determination

When an expert determination review is requested, the Expert Determination Review must include a document that includes the expert’s determination that “the risk is very small that the information could be used, alone or in combination with other reasonably available information, by an anticipated recipient to identify an individual who is a subject of the information,” attests that the requirements of 45 CFR section 164.514 (b)(1)(i) and (ii) have been met, and includes (or attaches) the documentation required by 45 CFR section 164.514(b)(1)(ii). This document must be signed by the expert.

These guidelines provide a starting point for expert determination review; however, the facts of each case chosen for expert determination review must be analyzed on an individual, case-by-case basis by the expert. If followed, the Guidelines may be referenced as part of the documentation used to support the expert determination. The documentation should also include a general description of the principles, methods, and analyses used, as well as an explanation of the analysis that justifies the expert determination.

The expert determination review may use the Expert Determination Template in Appendix A. The Expert Determination Template includes a confirmation that “the risk is very small that the information could be used, alone or in combination with other reasonably available information, by an anticipated recipient to identify an individual who is a subject of the information.”

If methods that have been used to de-identify the data are not described in the Guidelines, then the Expert will need to provide additional documentation that explains the statistical and scientific principles and methods used and the results of the additional analysis.

### Legal Review (Step 5)

Step 5 in the Data Assessment for Public Release Process provides for a legal review within the department. This may vary depending on the purpose of the release and whether or not the department or program is a HIPAA covered entity or not. This review may assess the data to be released for risk to the Department, and for potential implications on litigation, statutory or regulatory conditions on data release, and other legal considerations that may impact release. Legal Services may review the expert determination documentation to ensure compliance with the HIPAA Privacy Rule as applicable.

### Departmental Release Procedures (Step 6)

Step 6 in the Data Assessment for Public Release Process provides for departmental release procedures for de-identified data. After completion of the statistical de- identification process, each department will specify the additional review steps necessary for public release of various data products. Products may include but are not limited to reports, presentation, tables, PRA responses, media responses and legislative responses.

Potential reviews include Public Affairs. Public Affairs is often designated to receive all publications, brochures, or pamphlets intended for public distribution to be printed or reproduced to review the material to determine if it requires Agency Approval or Governor’s Office approval. Public Affairs may also be designated to review content to assess the data table for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 199026 (ADA).

Departments may also consider processes for quality assurance reviews: The may apply to data products being added to the web sites to ensure that they have had appropriate reviews and de-identification steps. It may also include reviews of updated reports. Many reports maintain the same variables and formats but have updated numbers/information on a periodic basis (monthly, quarterly, annually). For these reports, departments may consider a centralized review to ensure data products are consistent with previously reviewed reports and have not had changes that would change the previous assessment.
