---
icon: ban
---

# 4.3 Assess Potential Risk

This step requires the use of a documented method to assess the risk that small numerators or small denominators may result in conditions that put individuals at risk of being re-identified.

Assessment of potential risk for a given data set must take into account a range of contributing considerations. This includes understanding particular characteristics of a given data set that is being released. For example, if the potential values for a specific personal characteristic, such as race, results in many small numbers in data set A but does not in data set B, then the risk may be low for data set B and high for data A if the groupings of the personal characteristics include the same categories. For this reason, each department or program may set different values for risk based on the underlying distribution of these variables in the data sets of interest.

There are many methods used to assess potential risk. Many of the methods that are in use throughout the country are described in the various references provided in Section 15. While each department will document the method(s) chosen for use, the following description of the Publication Scoring Criteria is provided as an example and may be adopted by departments as a method to assess potential risk.

### Publication Scoring Criteria: Example of tool to assess potential risk

The Publication Scoring Criteria is used to identify the presence of small values that are considered sensitive in order to facilitate the assessment of potential risk. The Publication Scoring Criteria combines a number of conditions that increase the risk of a given data table and allows the department to evaluate those risks in combination with each other. The variables included in the Publication Scoring Criteria are those variables routinely used to publish data but are not all inclusive.

A variable is a symbol representing an unknown numerical or categorical value in an equation or table. A given variable may have different ranges assigned to it. Ranges assigned to the variable may be defined many ways which may increase or decrease the risk of identification of an individual represented in the table. This is seen in the Publication Scoring Criteria in that ranges for variables which will produce smaller groupings have a higher score.

The Publication Scoring Criteria in Figure 6 quantifies with a score two identification risks: size of potential population and variable specificity. The Publication Scoring Criteria is used to assess the need to perform statistical masking as a result of a small numerator, small denominator, or both. The Publication Scoring Criteria takes into account both variables associated with numerators, such as Events, and with denominators, such as Geography.

This method requires a score less than or equal to 12 for the data table to be released without additional masking of the data. Any score over 12 will require the use of statistical masking methods described in [Section 4.4](4.4-statistical-masking.md) or documentation regarding the specific characteristics of the data set that mitigate the risk.

When identifying the score for each variable, use the highest scoring criteria. For example if a table had age groups of 0 to 11 years, 12 to 14 years, and 15 to 18 years then the score for the “age range” variable would be +5 because the smallest age range is 12 to 14, which is an age range of three years.

If a variable has greater granularity than the score listed, use the highest score listed. For example, if the variable “Time” has a frequency of “weekly” then the score would be +5 which is the maximum score associated with the most granular level (monthly) of the variable in the Publication Scoring Criteria.

In addition to assessing the granularity of each variable, the interaction of the variables is also important. As discussed later in section 6.4, decreasing the granularity or the number of variables are both techniques for increasing the values for the numerators. The final criteria in Figure 6 is that for Variable Interactions. This provides for a subtraction of points if the only variables presented are the events (numerator), time and geography and an addition of points for including more variables in a given presentation. With respect to the subtraction of points, the score is based on the minimum value for the Events variable. For example, if the smallest value for the Events is 5 or more, then the score would be -5. However, if the smallest value for the Events is 2, then the score would be 0. This is discussed in more detail in [Section 6.2: Assessing Potential Risk - Publication Scoring Criteria](../6.-justification-of-thresholds-identified/6.2-assessing-potential-risk-publication-scoring-criteria.md).

In assessing risk, the scoring can be part of the justification to release or not release data but should not by itself be an absolute gateway to the release data. The review must take into account additional considerations including those that are discussed in this document in addition to the scoring.
