# 16.1 Establishing Minimum Numerator and Denominator

The DDG workgroup reviewed the published literature including information from other states and from the federal government. There was a great deal of variation in the numerical values chosen for the Numerator Condition. While the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) WONDER database suppresses cells with numerators less than 10, the National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network suppresses cells that are greater than 0 but less than 6. Examples range from 3 to 40 with many being 10 to 15. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) uses a small cell policy of suppressing values derived from fewer than 11 individuals. As stated in a 2014 publication associated with a data release of Medicare Provider Data, [“to protect the privacy of Medicare beneficiaries, any aggregated records which are derived from 10 or fewer beneficiaries are excluded from the Physician and Other Supplier PUF \[public use file\].”](#user-content-fn-1)[^1] Of note, CMS only uses a Numerator Condition.

Just as there is no consistent value for the Numerator Condition, neither is there a consistent value for the Denominator Condition. Some examples include:

* National Center for Health Statistics (public micro-data) – 250,000
* National Environmental Health Tracking Network – 100,000
* Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey – 5,000

In establishing a minimum denominator to protect confidentiality, the DDG workgroup began by looking at the risk associated with providing geography associated with record level data. As noted in the “Guidance Regarding Methods for De-Identification of Protected HIPAA Privacy Rule”, published November 2012 by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office for Civil Rights there is varying risk based on the level of zip code and how the zip code is combined with other variables. [It has been estimated that the combination of a patient’s Date of Birth, Sex, and 5-Digit ZIP Code is unique for over 50% of residents in the United States.](#user-content-fn-2)[^2] This means that over half of U.S. residents could be uniquely described just with these three data elements. [In contrast, it has been estimated that the combination of Year of Birth, Sex, and 3-Digit ZIP Code is unique for approximately 0.04% of residents in the United States.](#user-content-fn-3)[^3] For this reason, the HIPAA Safe Harbor rule specifies that the 3-Digit ZIP Code can be provided at the record level if the 3-Digit ZIP Code has a minimum of 20,000 people. By aggregating data for a given 3-Digit ZIP Code, the potential for identifying a unique individual is less than 0.04%.  By combining with the Numerator Condition, the risk becomes less than 0.04% because there will be a minimum of 11 individuals with a particular age and sex for the 3-Digit ZIP Code. Additionally, most tables will provide additional levels of aggregation further reducing risk. This reduction of risk is discussed further with respect to the Publication Scoring Criteria.&#x20;

A minimum denominator of 20,000 was chosen as part of the numerator-denominator condition to leverage the risk assessment cited above.&#x20;

The Numerator-Denominator Condition serves as an initial screening to assess potential risk for a dataset. If this condition is met, additional analysis is not necessary.  If the condition is not met, then the analysis proceeds to Step 3.

[^1]: “Medicare Fee-For Service Provider Utilization & Payment Data Physician and Other Supplier Public Use File: A Methodological Overview,” Prepared by: The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of Information Products and Data Analytics, April 7, 2014.

[^2]: * See P. Golle. Revisiting the uniqueness of simple demographics in the US population. In _Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society_. ACM Press, New York, NY. 2006: 77-80.
    * See L. Sweeney. K-anonymity: a model for protecting privacy. _International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness, and Knowledge-Based Systems_. 2002; 10(5): 557-570.

[^3]: See L. Sweeney. Testimony before that National Center for Vital and Health Statistics Workgroup for Secondary Uses of Health Information. August 23, 2007.
